# Community-alert-system
The Panic Alert System is a Python-based project that uses IoT devices to detect sudden falls and alert designated contacts for immediate assistance. The system is designed to be a reliable and quick response mechanism for high conflict prone zones. I have implemented a UDP based peer to peer (P2P) community alert system. In this network architecture, all the nodes in the network can act as both the client and as a server allowing them to share alerts to all clients in the network without the need for an intermediary as in the case of a centralized system. Our UDP implementation reduces network latency for real-time messaging which is crucial in making an efficient emergency alert system, making it suitable for our use case. At a high level, apart from the basic C header files, I have used unistd.h for multithreading using POSIX threads and arpa/inet.h to define some internet operations. The send_alert and receive_alert function is what powers this program. The receive_alert function constantly listens for incoming alerts and simply prints them if successful, in this case to the console. The send_alert function parses a text file (.txt) which has the IP addresses and port numbers of all clients in the network and broadcasts the user input alert to all those addresses except the host address. The two threads created in the main function, for receiving and sending alerts, works concurrently making possible real time message transfer without congesting and backlogging the network. This makes the design extremely robust and quick specifically for sending small packets of data such as alerts. Another feature of our design, which has been implemented theoretically is the geographical coordinates of the user being broadcasted along with the alert message. This program also handles several edge cases, while displaying messages for the same. For example, successful creation of the socket, successful binding of the socket, receiving and sending messages etc.
I have used the User Datagram Protocol (UDP) for this architecture. This is because the primary objective of an emergency alert system like this, is for short messages and alerts to be sent over a network to a range of addresses quickly. UDP satisfies this perfectly. Because it is a connectionless protocol, the necessity to hold a connection is not there making it faster and more robust than TCP. Implementing multithreading has also made out communication model significantly faster and resilient. 
